scale_notes.md, before:

# Work Log: Setting Up 10kg Load Cell for Plant Watering System

## Date: August 8, 2024

## Equipment Used:

- **10kg Load Cell** (Bought from [Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Geekstory-Converter-Breakout-Electronic-Raspberry/dp/B0D293F1CW/ref=sr_1_7?dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.xMiUE1Rd8vlV0k9aypBFjV0GjQhqL6JNI2v42oVwuet-1SapgyaG0Ef3RWRygIStQCt_bIhpVcTHpBoPH0DNbPaR2Y2-bmRhOVF4Vnhilp8JpKV1sFkPxoPwpWWAj88V8Ker2IQxpb8-drf2bHJtTRU-sXQ_BM2O497v_wNUOomct8WWPUE9hhTYcyJaMubC4KmDUvVb3yeOENCgeYvW1B1qr24kHXeMh5SN23i2vHwXeh4Od3QNuKjDnYp_MtRFLR5DTMuB0L7VvJ_cyHqHHeWTVAaYN0JiFdGP3qdo2Nc.IqNRgbxsf4vnhM7I2L9D1Rx57QExCoqX8B64RomgJcc&dib_tag=se&keywords=arduino+scale&qid=1722549473&sr=8-7))
- **HX711 Load Cell Amplifier**
- **Arduino Diecimila (ATmega168)**
- **Soldering Iron and Solder**
- **Female Dupont Connectors**
- **Multimeter** (for testing resistance)
- **Wires and Pins** (for extending connections)

## Work Done:

- Followed this video to ensure setup was smooth as possible. [Tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sxzoAGf1kOo&t=356s)
- Set up the 10kg load cell with the HX711 Load Cell Amplifier connected to Arduino Diecimila (ATmega168).
- Soldered pins onto the HX711 to extend the wires for better connection.
- Tested the resistance between the wires to ensure that the sensors were being read correctly.
  - Had to troubleshoot readings that were extremely off and not detecting any resistance.
  - Narrowed it down to the wiring not connecting well between the wire and the female Dupont connector.
  - Decided to solder the wires together for a better connection.
- Played around with the calibration number to correct the scale readings.

![My Project Setup](images/assembled_load_cell.jpeg)
![My Project Setup](images/soldered_wires.jpeg)
![My Project Setup](images/scaled_with_water.jpg)
![My Project Setup](images/Calibrated_Readings.jpg)
![My Project Setup](images/load_cell_scale.jpeg)

## Following Steps:

- Create a 3D Printed Case: Design and print a case to hold the scale in place, including a section to securely hold the water pitcher.
- Add LED Indicators: Integrate LED lights that will be triggered when the water level in the pitcher is too low.
- Code Integration: Merge this code with the existing water.ino file and integrate the wiring with the current Arduino setup to fully automate the plant watering system.

## Code:

```cpp
#include "HX711.h"
#include <EEPROM.h> // Include EEPROM library for storing the zero factor

// Pin definitions for the HX711 module
#define LOADCELL_DOUT_PIN  3  // Pin connected to DOUT of HX711
#define LOADCELL_SCK_PIN   2  // Pin connected to SCK of HX711

// EEPROM memory address for storing the zero factor
#define EEPROM_ADDRESS 0

HX711 scale;  // Create an instance of the HX711 class

// Calibration factor for scaling the raw data to weight units
float calibration_factor = -93999; // Adjust this value to match your scale setup

/**
 * @brief Arduino setup function.
 *
 * Initializes serial communication, sets up the HX711 load cell,
 * and loads the zero factor from EEPROM. If no valid zero factor is found,
 * the scale is tared, and the zero factor is stored in EEPROM.
 */
void setup() {
  Serial.begin(9600);  // Initialize serial communication at 9600 baud rate
  Serial.println("HX711 calibration sketch");
  Serial.println("Remove all weight from scale");
  Serial.println("After readings begin, place known weight on scale");

  scale.begin(LOADCELL_DOUT_PIN, LOADCELL_SCK_PIN);  // Initialize the HX711 module
  scale.set_scale();  // Set the scale to the default calibration factor

  // Load zero factor from EEPROM
  long zero_factor;
  EEPROM.get(EEPROM_ADDRESS, zero_factor);  // Retrieve stored zero factor from EEPROM
  if (zero_factor == 0xFFFFFFFF) {  // Check if no valid zero factor is found in EEPROM
    Serial.println("No zero factor found in EEPROM. Please tare the scale manually.");
    scale.tare();  // Manually tare the scale (reset to 0)
    zero_factor = scale.read_average();  // Get a baseline reading for the zero factor
    EEPROM.put(EEPROM_ADDRESS, zero_factor);  // Save the new zero factor to EEPROM
  } else {
    scale.set_offset(zero_factor);  // Apply the stored zero factor to the scale
    Serial.println("Zero factor loaded from EEPROM.");
  }

  Serial.print("Zero factor: ");  // Display the loaded or newly set zero factor
  Serial.println(zero_factor);
}

/**
 * @brief Arduino main loop function.
 *
 * Continuously reads the weight from the scale, applies the calibration factor,
 * and prints the results to the serial monitor. The calibration factor can be adjusted
 * through the serial interface.
 */
void loop() {
  scale.set_scale(calibration_factor);  // Apply the current calibration factor

  // Print the weight reading and the current calibration factor to the serial monitor
  Serial.print("Reading: ");
  Serial.print(scale.get_units(), 2);  // Display the weight with 2 decimal places
  Serial.print(" lbs");  // Display the units (lbs by default)
  Serial.print(" calibration_factor: ");
  Serial.print(calibration_factor);
  Serial.println();

  delay(1000);  // Delay for 1 second to allow stable readings
}
```

Commit message:

Updated notes to include troubleshooting of pump

scale_notes.md, after:

# Work Log: Setting Up 10kg Load Cell for Plant Watering System

## Date: August 8, 2024

## Equipment Used:

- **10kg Load Cell** (Bought from [Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Geekstory-Converter-Breakout-Electronic-Raspberry/dp/B0D293F1CW/ref=sr_1_7?dib=eyJ2IjoiMSJ9.xMiUE1Rd8vlV0k9aypBFjV0GjQhqL6JNI2v42oVwuet-1SapgyaG0Ef3RWRygIStQCt_bIhpVcTHpBoPH0DNbPaR2Y2-bmRhOVF4Vnhilp8JpKV1sFkPxoPwpWWAj88V8Ker2IQxpb8-drf2bHJtTRU-sXQ_BM2O497v_wNUOomct8WWPUE9hhTYcyJaMubC4KmDUvVb3yeOENCgeYvW1B1qr24kHXeMh5SN23i2vHwXeh4Od3QNuKjDnYp_MtRFLR5DTMuB0L7VvJ_cyHqHHeWTVAaYN0JiFdGP3qdo2Nc.IqNRgbxsf4vnhM7I2L9D1Rx57QExCoqX8B64RomgJcc&dib_tag=se&keywords=arduino+scale&qid=1722549473&sr=8-7))
- **HX711 Load Cell Amplifier**
- **Arduino Diecimila (ATmega168)**
- **Soldering Iron and Solder**
- **Female Dupont Connectors**
- **Multimeter** (for testing resistance)
- **Wires and Pins** (for extending connections)

## Work Done:

- Followed this video to ensure setup was smooth as possible. [Tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sxzoAGf1kOo&t=356s)
- Set up the 10kg load cell with the HX711 Load Cell Amplifier connected to Arduino Diecimila (ATmega168).
- Soldered pins onto the HX711 to extend the wires for better connection.
- Tested the resistance between the wires to ensure that the sensors were being read correctly.
  - Had to troubleshoot readings that were extremely off and not detecting any resistance.
  - Narrowed it down to the wiring not connecting well between the wire and the female Dupont connector.
  - Decided to solder the wires together for a better connection.
- Played around with the calibration number to correct the scale readings.
- Conducted troubleshooting for an issue with the water pump, which was not receiving power. Identified that two cables inside the enclosure were loose. Specifically, Pin 9 was not connected to the A1 Coil pin, and the black GND pin was not connected to the A2 Coil pin. After reconnecting the cables appropriately, verified functionality by testing the system on several dry plants around the house. The water pump performed as expected, confirming that the issue was resolved.

![My Project Setup](images/assembled_load_cell.jpeg)
![My Project Setup](images/soldered_wires.jpeg)
![My Project Setup](images/scaled_with_water.jpg)
![My Project Setup](images/Calibrated_Readings.jpg)
![My Project Setup](images/load_cell_scale.jpeg)

## Following Steps:

- Create a 3D Printed Case: Design and print a case to hold the scale in place, including a section to securely hold the water pitcher.
- Add LED Indicators: Integrate LED lights that will be triggered when the water level in the pitcher is too low.
- Code Integration: Merge this code with the existing water.ino file and integrate the wiring with the current Arduino setup to fully automate the plant watering system.
- Create diagrams of the wiring for future students to use. I have to make sure that I write good documentation.

## Code:

```cpp
#include "HX711.h"
#include <EEPROM.h> // Include EEPROM library for storing the zero factor

// Pin definitions for the HX711 module
#define LOADCELL_DOUT_PIN  3  // Pin connected to DOUT of HX711
#define LOADCELL_SCK_PIN   2  // Pin connected to SCK of HX711

// EEPROM memory address for storing the zero factor
#define EEPROM_ADDRESS 0

HX711 scale;  // Create an instance of the HX711 class

// Calibration factor for scaling the raw data to weight units
float calibration_factor = -93999; // Adjust this value to match your scale setup

/**
 * @brief Arduino setup function.
 *
 * Initializes serial communication, sets up the HX711 load cell,
 * and loads the zero factor from EEPROM. If no valid zero factor is found,
 * the scale is tared, and the zero factor is stored in EEPROM.
 */
void setup() {
  Serial.begin(9600);  // Initialize serial communication at 9600 baud rate
  Serial.println("HX711 calibration sketch");
  Serial.println("Remove all weight from scale");
  Serial.println("After readings begin, place known weight on scale");

  scale.begin(LOADCELL_DOUT_PIN, LOADCELL_SCK_PIN);  // Initialize the HX711 module
  scale.set_scale();  // Set the scale to the default calibration factor

  // Load zero factor from EEPROM
  long zero_factor;
  EEPROM.get(EEPROM_ADDRESS, zero_factor);  // Retrieve stored zero factor from EEPROM
  if (zero_factor == 0xFFFFFFFF) {  // Check if no valid zero factor is found in EEPROM
    Serial.println("No zero factor found in EEPROM. Please tare the scale manually.");
    scale.tare();  // Manually tare the scale (reset to 0)
    zero_factor = scale.read_average();  // Get a baseline reading for the zero factor
    EEPROM.put(EEPROM_ADDRESS, zero_factor);  // Save the new zero factor to EEPROM
  } else {
    scale.set_offset(zero_factor);  // Apply the stored zero factor to the scale
    Serial.println("Zero factor loaded from EEPROM.");
  }

  Serial.print("Zero factor: ");  // Display the loaded or newly set zero factor
  Serial.println(zero_factor);
}

/**
 * @brief Arduino main loop function.
 *
 * Continuously reads the weight from the scale, applies the calibration factor,
 * and prints the results to the serial monitor. The calibration factor can be adjusted
 * through the serial interface.
 */
void loop() {
  scale.set_scale(calibration_factor);  // Apply the current calibration factor

  // Print the weight reading and the current calibration factor to the serial monitor
  Serial.print("Reading: ");
  Serial.print(scale.get_units(), 2);  // Display the weight with 2 decimal places
  Serial.print(" lbs");  // Display the units (lbs by default)
  Serial.print(" calibration_factor: ");
  Serial.print(calibration_factor);
  Serial.println();

  delay(1000);  // Delay for 1 second to allow stable readings
}
```
